So happy Thursday, everybody. Welcome to the Data Science Hangout. Hope everyone's having
a great week. If we haven't met before, I'm Rachel Dempsey. I lead our pro community at
Posit. If this is your first time ever joining us at a Data Science Hangout, welcome. This
is our open space to chat about data science leadership, questions you're facing, and getting
to hear about what's going on in the world of data across many different industries and
companies. And so we're here every Thursday, except for July. At the same time, same place.
So if you're watching this recording on YouTube later, you can also add these events to your
own calendar using the link below. But together, we're all dedicated to making this a welcoming
environment for everyone. So we'd love to hear from everybody, no matter your level
of experience, the area of work, or industry. It is also totally okay to just listen in
and just hang out here with us. There's also three ways you can jump in and either ask
questions or provide your own perspective on certain topics too. So you can always jump
in by raising your hand on Zoom and I'll keep an eye out. You can put questions in the Zoom
chat. And feel free to just put a little star next to it if you want me to read it
out loud instead, if you're maybe in a busy coffee shop or something. And then third,
we also have a Slido link where you can ask questions anonymously. And I think Hannah
or Curtis will share that in the chat here in just a second. But I am so excited to have
my colleague, Joe Chang, joining us here today as our featured leader. Joe is the CTO and
first employee at Posit, well back then RStudio, where he helped create the RStudio IDE and
Shiny web framework along with countless complimentary tools and packages. And Joe, I'd love to get
things kicked off here by having you also introduce yourself and just kind of share
a little bit about your role and what it means to be CTO at Posit.
Yeah, thanks for having me. CTO is actually an honorary title. There are a lot of different
kinds of CTOs in the industry. And one of them is basically an engineer that joined
very early and it's an honorary title. And that's what it certainly it started out as
for me. Started out as purely an acknowledgement that there are strategic conversations that
the board and the executive team would like me to be part of. But my day-to-day was still
100% software engineer and then team lead. And these days, I think probably 90 plus percent
of my time is as a team lead on a Shiny team. It's a team of about 11. And I, you know,
every once in a while will do more CTO stuff, which is having conversations that are more
sort of at the strategic level with the other execs to talk about the direction that we're
taking the company in. So for my day-to-day, I try to do, you know, 50% coding and 50%
leading the team. That usually is more like 15% coding and 85% leading the team. There's
always emergencies and, you know, last-minute conversations that come up. So I do a lot
of code reviews. I do a ton of sort of helping to decide feature directions. I do some talking
with customers. I do some support. Just really anything that comes up. And we try to run
our team that way for the most part. Most of our roles are relatively loose and flexible.
So we really value having everyone on the team, or certainly all the software engineers,
to be really thoughtful about what kind of features would be interesting to add to Shiny
to be able to design their own features to implement and to be responsible for the quality
and support of their own features. So yes, for me, it's Shiny all the time. Shiny day
and night. Shiny for R. Shiny for Python. Packages that complement Shiny. HTML widgets.
For the last month, I've been working on a sort of the equivalent to the DT package
for R, which is a way to view data tables, data frames, and data tables very quickly
with a rich HTML interface. I've been working on that for Shiny for Python, where we have
not had that capability in the past. So that's one particular feature that I've been working
on. But yeah, for sure, most of my time is in meetings and helping other team members
achieve what they need to. Thanks, Joe. And I forgot to ask you this, but I usually ask
everybody, what's something that you like to do outside of work too? For me, that's cycling.
I don't do it nearly as much as I'd like to, but that's my favorite way to blow off some steam
after a long day. Thank you. Okay, so while we're waiting for some questions to come in from
everybody here, thank you so much for the intro. And I'm wondering, if somebody had never heard
about Shiny before, how would you describe it? Yeah. So to me, Shiny is fundamentally about
letting data scientists create interactive web applications to take their analysis that they're
already doing on their own machine and taking the insights that they are gaining from their data on
their own machine and being able to expose that to usually other people, sometimes to themselves,
but usually to expose that to other people in a really dynamic and interactive way.
In the past before Shiny, I think you would see, I mean, it's still very common to issue a static
report and send it to someone. And if there were lots of variables in your analysis, if there were
lots of different ways you might want to slice and dice the data, you would either just add more and
more pages to that PDF or HTML page. And we had a lot of people tell us that they would exchange
PDFs with thousands of pages and good luck trying to find the page that you want. Or you would do
this back and forth of like, okay, here's my best guess at what you want. And then you'd have this
endless email back and forth of, how about this? How about this? How about this? Until they find the
needle in the haystack that they're looking for. So that's just one example of when it might be
useful to take insights that you can easily gain for yourself on your own console and your own
notebook, and to be able to turn that into something that empowers other people in your
organization or that you're collaborating with, or just that you think might find your data
interesting, to be able to interact with that data in a more dynamic and modern way.
That's how it started, that and teaching statistics. That was the other big thing that we
were sort of very focused on in the beginning. And boy, it's been interesting what people have taken
Shiny and used it for. So in terms of what it's for, everything from BI to machine learning and
large language models and games and fantasy football draft analyzers, all sorts of interesting
things people have done with it. But one of the most important things for us is that it is
accessible for anyone who calls themselves a data scientist. So you do need to code. That is very
important to us. That's one of the core tenets of our company, is that we really believe in code
first. But you don't have to be able to code in web development technologies. You don't need to
be a web developer to create Shiny apps. You just need to be conversant in the language of data
science. Thank you. And I see an anonymous question that came in a little bit ago, which was,
what's the elevator pitch? And then maybe further discussion points for investing in Shiny rather
than using point-and-click BI tools. Yeah, absolutely. That's a good question. And it's
interesting. I had one thing in mind when I created Shiny, and then that has sort of evolved as I've
gotten feedback from people who have spent a lot of time using both BI tools and Shiny. So
my elevator pitch in the beginning was that BI tools are great, and you should use Shiny when
those run out of steam. In the beginning, that was really about advanced analytics. So if you
want to just draw some scatter plots and line charts, I mean, BI tools can do a lot. I'm not
trying to be glib. But if what you're trying to do is completely within the wheelhouse of BI tools,
great. Like, no problem. Those are awesome tools. And if you find yourself wanting to use
a predictive model that they don't support, and there are a lot that they don't support,
or you want to pull from some data source that is more dynamic than a BI tool is designed for,
then use Shiny. So it's sort of like, for the simple stuff, sure, use a BI tool. I mean,
if you can afford it, a lot of them aren't cheap. But then for the other stuff, use Shiny.
And I actually had a number of people tell me that it was actually not like that for them. That,
in fact, numerous times I've heard people have to deploy to BI tools within their organization, or
if they're consultants and they're at a client, that the only deployment target they can feasibly
use is, say, Tableau. They would actually build it in Shiny first and then port it to Tableau.
And I was like, you're going to have to explain to me why you're doing that. That is very surprising.
And what they said to me was that a number of the advantages of just using code in the first place
were just such big advantages that they didn't want to give them up when they were using Tableau.
So first of all, it was very common, they would say, for them to work really hard and come up with
this very sophisticated Tableau application, or Tableau dashboard. And then the stakeholder would
say, oh, that looks great. Please just change this or that thing. And this or that thing,
because of the way these point and click tools work, you would have to start the whole thing
over. I mean, you would have all the insights you gained along the way, but the mechanics of
building it, you would have to build it again from scratch. Whereas for a Shiny app, you could
just replace a single line to use a different data source. Or sometimes they would be like,
that's great, and we want the same dashboard now for these 10 other departments, these 10 other
scenarios. And again, you'd be in this position of the reuse was really a lot harder than when
you're dealing with code. So that was one. The second people told me was that the extensibility
was really frustrating for them. To build a BI dashboard that serves you well for a while, but
then to know that there is always the possibility of some new requirement arriving that they would
not be able to satisfy, whereas Shiny having a ceiling that's essentially, by comparison,
it's infinite, was very comforting to them. And the third is that the feedback I received was
that if you know how to code, that doing a Shiny dashboard in code is just more fun than the
point and click. Especially when you know what you want to do and you know how you would code it,
it's frustrating to try to figure out how the point and click interface wants you to express that.
And then finally, just being pragmatic, people told me that it's like a better
resume builder to have built a bunch of Shiny apps than to have built a bunch of Tableau
point and click dashboards that it led them to better career opportunities. I'm just being
real with you guys. That's not something like we put on the website, but I've
heard that too many times to think that that's not a real motivation for some people.
Shiny, because we're all control freaks, totally, Luke.
Joe, a few people were commenting that was a very long elevator ride.
Yeah, I tend to do that.
No, that was great, though. Thank you so much. Ethan, I see you had asked a question in the
Zoom chat. Do you want to jump in here? Yeah, sure. Hi, Joe. I actually haven't tried
Shiny in Python yet, but just want to get you some high level thoughts when you're
developing Shiny for Python. Is there anything that you've learned from developing it for R
first? And in terms of feature parity, is it a asset or liability for the engineering team
when developing Shiny for Python? Yeah, very good questions.
I'd say one of the biggest things we learned, I'll say there's two main things that come to
mind when thinking about the process of developing Shiny for Python. One, well, I'd say this
isn't something I learned, but definitely some other people on the team learned. Jumping
to Python was not as scary as it sounded. I think for a lot of people that are on my team,
R and JavaScript, but mostly R, was the language that they learned to program in and have invested
many, many, many years of their lives and careers in. And there was a lot of assumption
in the beginning that we are going to have to hire a bunch of Python experts.
I don't want to oversimplify because I think it is not true that you can just pick up a book
and learn Python really well in just a few days. You really need to spend time with a language
to learn beyond just the syntax, learn the true Pythonic way to do things, and that takes some
time. But when you are working full-time on a project with a bunch of team members that are
going through the same thing, it actually did not take very long for our devs to be quite productive
in Python. So that was one thing, is that on the technical side, it was not really a very
difficult transition for the team to become bilingual. And I think the second thing is that
in Python, this might not be that interesting for data science, but for software engineering,
Python in recent versions has gotten better and better at static type-checking, so the ability
to mark up your variables and function arguments with not only the name of a parameter, but the
type that you expect it to be, and then having tools that will analyse your code and make sure
that every function is being called in an appropriate way. Those tools, I think, are
mostly seen these days as a liability in data science, that they slow you down because you
have to write this extra code. But when you are building something like Shiny, it's a huge help.
And that's one of the things that I think coming away from shipping the first versions of Shiny
for Python, it's like, it would have been really nice if we could have these same
tools on the R side to help us maintain Shiny for R. Sorry, can you remind me, what was the
second part of your question? Yeah, it's about feature parity. Do you see that as an asset or
liability for your engineering team? Yeah, yeah. So do you mean feature parity between R and Python
in general, or trying to achieve feature parity between Shiny for R and Shiny for Python?
Shiny in specific. Oh, okay, yeah. So I think it is definitely a double-edged sword. It's
super helpful to have built all this once before, because so many problems we not only have a
solution for, but we thought about multiple solutions before we decided on one. And we can
go back and reanalyze very quickly without having to invent too much stuff from whole cloth.
But the tough thing, I think, is that sometimes we are a little bit,
we try not to, but we feel a little bit stuck with the decisions that we've made in the past.
So the biggest one that we've been discussing to death, not, sorry, we've been discussing
is Shiny modules is a feature for Shiny for R where if you want to, if your app is getting
too complex, there's too much stuff going on in one server function or one UI, you can break it
up into modules and those modules can be reused. They can be, they're namespaced. It really helps
you reason about your app as a collection of smaller pieces. In Python, we have that feature
as well. It's also called Shiny modules. Well, Python modules are a thing in Python and the name
modules, like for us to move away from that for Python, it means now we have two. There are Shiny
modules for R and then there are Python components for Shiny for Python. And that is super annoying
for all of us. So I think there are a lot of little things like this where we feel a little
bit beholden to the past because it would be awkward to have different versions, but at the
same time, it doesn't necessarily always fit a hundred percent. It hasn't been that bad, but
the times when it comes up, it is certainly as frustrating. Thank you. It's good perspective.
Libby, I see you had a question in the chat. Do you want to jump in here?
Sure. Can you hear me? My mic's been acting up. Sounds good. You can. Okay. Yeah. My question is
if you could go back in time to like 15 years ago, 20 years ago and tell yourself what you're doing
right now, like what your career looks like, what your life looks like, what do you think would
surprise your younger self the most? Everything. Everything. I've been unbelievably fortunate
in not only my career, but in my family life, in my relationship with my extended family. I mean,
my life has, yeah, it's been an incredible run. And I think there were a set of things that I
really wanted to accomplish by the end of my career. And I don't know, I sort of find myself
in my mid forties, like needing to cast a new vision because all the things that I wanted to do,
I have just had the great privilege and been so fortunate as to have those things sort of
happen to me in my career. And I think in particular, 15 years ago in my career, I felt like
I had stumbled into this incredible industry, just talking about tech in general, that back
then had a very different feel, like it felt like we were, it was not quite as mainstream.
And I felt like I had stumbled into this, I mean, so fun, like such a fun way to make a living,
to be writing programs all day with smart and interesting people. And to feel like I had
like all my natural talents aligned with the skills and interests you need to be in software.
And the thing that scared me 15 years ago was, what if all of my career contributions through
luck or happenstance add up to not very much? That was my fear, was that I have the education
for this, I have the natural talent for this, I have the opportunity, but there's so much
luck involved, will I get the opportunity to actually do something that is interesting and
meaningful? And when I was working on RStudio, I was already feeling like, oh, wow, this could
really be it. And then Shiny felt like, okay, this is overdoing it a little bit. But I mean,
it was like, I never had, I never pictured myself coming up with like a truly, I mean,
I was going to say truly original idea. I mean, the idea is like 99% building on the shoulders of
reactive work that was done in JavaScript. But even like the insight to apply it in this new way
on a server side to data science, I never aspired to have an idea like that. I just aspired for
somebody else to have an idea and I would be able to help and for it to be like really impactful.
So in our little corner of the world that is data science, Shiny has had a bigger impact than I was
ever hoping for out of my career. So I think that would be the most comforting thing for me 15 years
ago to find out it's not all going to add up to nothing. Like there is going to be some good that
comes out of the stuff that you do that these ideas are going to impact people's work and
impact the design of other packages that have been created both in R and in Python. So I'm just
super, super grateful for that because that was like it was really something that I was very,
very anxious about that it would all add up to nothing. So I just got a little bit real.
Thank you. I don't think you have to worry anymore about that concern.
Thank you, Joe. And I saw it and thank you for the question, Libby. I see Lisa said,
please answer this without making us tear up again like you did at comp.
And it was just reminding me like I love listening to you present Joe and how you tell stories and
how you can be vulnerable and put emotion into your presentations. And I was just wondering,
how do you learn that? How did you learn how to get up on stage and make us feel all those
emotions that we all did at our studio conference? You know, it's funny, I can tell you exactly
how it happened. I mean, I'd given a lot of presentations before
that one, but that was the first one that I was like, what if I made this like 90% about
the technology, but 10%, you know, share something that that cost me a little bit.
And it was actually because I was, I attended local church. And there's,
there was this pastor who got up, he and his wife, and they, in front of all these people
and being live streamed, talked about how he had cheated on her in the first year of their marriage.
And I mean, it had been, I don't know, 20, 30 years, but still like that the two of them would
get up and talk about, like the most painful thing, the most painful betrayal that he ever
inflicted on her that they would both get up and talk about it. I was like, holy crap, like,
that, the courage that it takes to do that. And I like, I just got so much value out of that,
because who shares that kind of stuff in, you know, live in person. So I'm not trying to compare me
saying, oh, I was feeling a little bit bad about my career to that. I mean, we're, but, but I was
thinking, like, this energy is so, like, it was so meaningful, you know, like, it was such a
beautiful moment. And there was just no, like, pure head insight that could compare. And, and I,
and I so it like, it made me feel close to them that they were sharing something that was so
close to their, you know, I don't know, so vulnerable. So yeah, I brought it up with my
speaking coach. She was a little bit like, wait, why are you gonna do this? And I was like,
I don't know, like, I just really love this community. And I feel like, you know, whenever
we like the best parts of this community are not, it's not about the technical exchange. It's,
it's when we do have those opportunities to get real with each other. Like when people talk about
imposter syndrome, from the stage, it, those are some of the most powerful moments. And I felt like,
like, what if I did that from a keynote, because that story is true, you know, like that, that,
that was not something I had to conjure up. I think about that moment all the time. So yeah,
I thought, oh, and actually, I have to give credit to Jessie Mostopak. I told that story to her.
And she was like, get out of town. Like, as soon as you said, like, that was supposed to be my last
day at our studio, I was, I was like, tell me the rest of this story. So she really, she, I have to
give her I think the most of the credit for recognizing that that story was one of those,
it could be one of those moments. So.
Thank you, Joe. It feels like there's not really a natural transition for me to go from this
emotional conversation to jumping back into technical, but we're just going to do it. So
thank you, Joe. I see that there are a few questions earlier in the chat I want to get to.
But Dan, I see you, you put a question there about how you're starting to develop in Shiny
coming from Python. Do you want to jump in here with that?
Yeah, sure. Sure, Rachel. Hi, Joe. I am a, you know, more of a Python developer,
although I started years and years ago, many blue moons ago with R and really fell in love with it,
and kind of coming back to it a little bit and trying to develop with Shiny. One frustration
I have is just around debugging. And when you've got, you know, all these panes and windows and
windows and UI widgets, can you share your thoughts around or best practices,
tips, whatever, on the best way to kind of go through the debugging process?
Yeah, absolutely. And can you just clarify, when you say debugging,
you mean in a more general sense, not just using an interactive debugger?
Yeah, correct. Like, I do everything in RStudio at the moment. And I run the app,
all of a sudden, it just opens up and then closes. Or I run something, it spools an error.
And, you know, it's not always obvious where the error actually is. It could be in the output side,
it could be on the server side. And just maybe the pattern for debugging in
RShiny is just so different from what I'm used to. That could be it too.
That could be it too. Yeah, it absolutely is. Well, especially if your work on Python,
was it around, you know, like notebooks and scripts? Or were you...
Yeah, you got it. Yeah. Jupyter notebooks, scripts, that kind of thing.
Yeah, absolutely. So I think for those of you who did not use Shiny, especially,
when you are doing sort of normal analysis with a notebook or a script on your desktop,
your code generally executes from beginning to end, right? Like you might have some functions,
but those functions are called when you call them. And you have loops, but they loop when you loop.
It's very transparent, like where the interpreter is at any given moment.
With Shiny, and almost every other form of interactive framework, you provide
code to the framework, and the framework decides when it executes. So it makes it much more,
much less intuitive to debug, because like, okay, this code is executing. Why is it executing? Like,
how did it get here? There's much... It's much less transparent when code is executing,
why it's executing. So there's a couple things that I'll tell you from a debugging perspective.
Number one, I think that Hadley's book, Mastering Shiny, has a chapter on this. And we definitely
have at least a couple of video resources where we've given talks about this. So I'd
highly recommend those. But I have a couple of sort of principles that I always go back to as well.
Number one, and maybe this less applies to you if you're coming from Python, but
stack traces are very important. So when you... Often when you get an error in Shiny, you get a
big bunch of lines spit out at the console that say, you know, from this file, this function name,
from this file, this function name, this file, this function name. And they often are like multiple
lines. And often people find that scary, because a lot of the function names that are in there are
function names that they might not recognize, because it's not code that they wrote that's
executing. It's code that's inside of a package that's inside of a package that's, you know,
calling base R, you know. Exactly, yeah. Yeah. So it's very important to not be afraid of that
stack trace. It is very important to take the time to learn how to read those and understand
exactly what's going on. And what the stack trace is telling you is that at the moment that this
error occurred, what were the functions in order that had been called? So if you think about,
you know, at any given moment when code is executing for R, that code is probably in a
function. And that function was called by another function. And that call was called by another
function. And that call was... And so on and so forth. And it could be 20 levels deep.
That is called your call stack. And when an error occurs, one of the most useful things to know is
what was the call stack. And when that's printed to the console, now it's called a stack trace.
So you can take that stack trace and you can read up it and just ignore the lines that you
don't recognize and find the line that you do recognize that says this was the line of code
in your app.R file. It was line 49. That was the thing that was executing when this error happened.
And I think that, you know, for the easy cases where, let's say, I don't know, you
use the wrong function name or you indexed into a data frame using an invalid variable or something
like that, just understanding the stack trace, that will be enough for you to fix the problem.
So that's one. The second thing you can do that's super useful is, especially in Shiny,
never forget that there is a JavaScript console also that might be printing errors. And this is,
like, I feel really bad about this. We should do things in Shiny to surface this more prominently.
But when you're in your browser looking at your Shiny app, if things are not behaving the way
you expect and you don't see any errors in the R console, you can show the JavaScript console
in your browser. And if you see a bunch of errors there, that's a big clue for you as well.
Often that means there's some kind of bug in a component that you're using,
whether it's in Shiny or some kind of third-party component. But, you know, if you're raising a
GitHub issue or whatever, that's some of the most useful information you can provide.
The third, and I'll move on after this, is to so Shiny does demand that you write your code
in a certain way. We have reactive outputs and reactive expressions, and you have to
put your code in a certain place to get it to execute at the right time. That doesn't mean
that your sort of data science logic, that your data analysis, your data manipulation, and your
visualization, that logic doesn't have to live there. You can write functions that live off to
the side. They can even live in a separate function. They can even live in a package if you want.
So you can write functions that are not Shiny. They're just R functions that perform the tasks
that you want, and you call them from Shiny. You call them from your Shiny outputs.
The advantage of doing it this way is that if something goes wrong, you can test these pieces
in isolation from the console. So you can make sure that each of these functions that you create,
that do your data manipulation, that do your data visualization, you can ensure that they are
working correctly. And then your Shiny app collapses to just like a very small number of lines of code,
and then it's much easier to reason about when things are being called and why.
Yeah, that's helpful. I've been using the breakpoints and browser and things like that
a little bit, but it's still, just compared to what I'm used to, a different mental model,
but I think what you laid out is helpful, so thank you.
Yeah, the browser and breakpoints are super helpful when you need them, but
if you, like on my team, I'm constantly using the phrase, can you reason about it? I mean,
they must be so sick of me saying that, but like when you write code, it is not enough that it
works. If it's important for it to be right, it's not enough that it works. You have to be able to
reason about it, and I find like browser is the most helpful when you have lost the ability to
reason about your code. So definitely use it, but also think to yourself, like if this was really
the only way for me to figure out what was going on, maybe it's time to refactor my code a little
bit also. So, oh, great. Libby said, Libby Harin said, I love Tan Ho's little blurb,
functions contain logic, modules call those functions, app bar calls the modules, that's
great. Yeah, there's a lot of great links and resources being shared in the chat too.
Yeah, and just to remind everybody, you can save the chat too, so those little buttons below that
say more, you could save those links there too. Joe, so another question, oh, Sam, I see you had
a question in the chat earlier. Do you want to jump in here? Yeah, sure. Yep. Okay, so I just
had a question regarding the various development frameworks and what your thoughts are, development
Golem, Rhino for production, great development. Has Pawset considered releasing their own framework
once upon a time before their release? Yeah, the question is, if you guys are not familiar,
there are a couple of packages that have been created to sort of provide more opinionated
structure around how Shiny apps are written. So Golem and Rhino are probably the two, by far the
two most popular. I have to say, I'm a little embarrassed, like this is a very important topic
and I know people have like really strong opinions about this and in particular, I think Golem has
huge proponents among people that I know and respect. I personally have not spent that much
time with these frameworks. I think just the tradition that I come from in my background in
software engineering, I feel like a lot of people, sorry, this is not the only reason people use
these frameworks, but I do think that part of one thing that I've noticed that people really like
in a lot of parts of data science is, especially if you didn't like set out to become a programmer,
but accidentally became a programmer. I think a lot of people feel like if they're doing what it
says in the tutorial, if they're doing what it says in an article that Hadley wrote, then they're
doing it right. And if they're doing something that they sort of invented or a pattern that they just
came up with, then like that's a hack or that's a workaround or whatever. So I've had a lot of
people ask me things, you know, like on the Shiny issues or Shiny forums and say like, hey, how do I
solve this problem? Or it would be great if you had this feature. I solved it this way, but it would
be nice to have it for real. And it's like, the way you did it is perfect. Like what about this
solution does not satisfy you? And they're like, yeah, well, but I did it. So I would really like
a grownup to do it, you know? And I think in the beginning, it felt like a lot of people were
looking for a lot more guidance for how to structure their Shiny apps. And Gollum provided
a set of opinions that people could look to, you know, Vincent and Colin and say, those people are
clearly experts. If I use Gollum, then I'm like, I'm like allowed to do that. Whereas I had much
more of an attitude of like, it's R, so you should feel free to package these things however you want.
And you don't need anybody to tell you that that's, you know, okay or not. I do totally reserve the
right to judge you, but you should do it anyway. So I think over the years, though, it has,
like, more and more people have told me, like, this is, it is not just about that. It's not just
like a set of opinions that are sort of nice to have that they actually do try to provide like a
lower friction environment for you to do development and have been very thoughtful
about how you sort of run and reload your app. And I totally believe that it has value. And I just,
I have to admit, I have underinvested in spending time with those. But I certainly,
you know, certainly I expect those things to work well, given how, you know, how much people use them.
To go back to the question right before this, there was a follow-up question about,
like, could you say a little bit more about what you mean by can you reason about it?
I think it might be helpful for us all. Yeah. It's my favorite topic. Yeah. So I think
just to sort of reiterate, when you write software or do an analysis or whatever,
there's a level of I got it to work. And then there's the level of, like, it works and I can
reason about it. And what that means is, like, software, complex pieces of software are among
the most complicated thing, things that humankind has ever devised. You know, like, what other
human-made construct can have, you know, hundreds of millions of pieces and yet they're expected to
all fit and work together so precisely that if one token is off, you know, rockets explode and,
you know, you get the wrong answers. And I don't know what the limit is, but, like,
you know, even the smartest humans, there is some small number of variables you can hold in your
head. There's a small number of operations that you can hold in your head at any one time.
So when we work on software that's non-trivial, when we work on software that in its totality
is more than the human mind, more than any one human mind can hold at any one given time,
the main challenge in software engineering is about how do you take all this complexity and
break it down into smaller pieces, each of which you can reason about, each of which you can hold
in your head, each of which you can look at and be like, yeah, I can fully ingest this entire
function definition. I can read it, you know, line by line and prove to myself this is definitely
correct if the functions that it's calling don't have bugs and if it's called in the right way.
So with those caveats, like, if the things that this thing is calling are correct
and I'm called correctly, then the result will be correct because the logic here is correct.
So software engineering at all but the most beginner level is a lot about this. How do you
break up inherently complicated things that we're trying to do into small pieces that are
individually easy to reason about? And that's half the battle right there. The other half of the
battle is how do we combine them in ways that can be reliable and also easy to reason about?
So it's these two pieces, small pieces reliably composed. If you can achieve that,
that's what I'm talking about. Like, that's software that you can reason about.
So this has implications for data science as well, right? Like, when you have a data science,
you're doing some kind of analysis on some data and it starts out as, oh, I'm just doing these
simple things. I'm, like, doing this manipulation and then I'm doing this visualization. But then
as you get deeper and deeper into it, it grows and grows and grows and grows. And you're at the point
where you're at the end and you don't remember where these variables came from. You don't
remember, like, what's the difference between this data frame and this data frame. And you go back
and hopefully start breaking it into functions. Or somehow dividing it into smaller pieces that
each focus on a thing and then you join those pieces together in your overall script. So that
is, that's this principle of small pieces individually able to be reasoned about.
And when you think about, like, other rules that you might have heard about software engineering,
like, we know when you're writing functions, using global variables is bad. That's another one of
these things where that hurts your ability to hold the entire function in your head and to prove that
it'll work correctly because who knows who's setting that global variable to what value.
So you can't prove to yourself, like, this function is definitely correct. So
I think I, like, if there's anything that you're working on that needs to be correct,
like, if you're just, like, zipping off some analysis and, like, it really doesn't matter,
you just want a pretty picture or something like that, whatever. I don't know what that situation
is. But if you don't care if the answer is right, sure. But if you do care that the answer is right,
I try never to stop when I have an answer, but I can't reason about the code. I always try to go
back and do the refactoring that's necessary just so I can prove to myself that the answer is right.
Oh, and the other big benefit to this is that those individual pieces, if it does turn out
that there's a mistake somewhere, you can individually debug, test, unit test those
individual pieces. And when there are problems, you'll much more easily be able to find them.
Great. Thank you. So I see an anonymous question that kind of touches on what you've asked as
well, Alan. So I'm going to ask you to jump in here, too, first with your question.
Yeah, sure. Thanks. Hi, Jo. I'm really curious about, you mentioned earlier that you and the
team had to think a lot about, and you were sort of nervous about, like, how do we learn Python?
How do we learn what we need to know here to do Shiny for Python? I'm really curious now that
it's like you're trying to gain momentum with it, trying to establish it, et cetera. Like,
have you had to come up with a different way to approach the Python community than maybe you would
have taken for granted in our community? Like, we know that community has changed so much over
15, 20 years. Like, what's it like to come into the Python community now? And how did that feel?
What was successful? Was it hard? Curious how you come into that space.
It is 1,000% different. It is completely and utterly different. And, I mean, it's hard to
enumerate how many differences that there are because there are so many. But the biggest by far
is that, I mean, Python is just such a noisy space. Well, that's a really uncharitable word.
It's a very vibrant and active space. I think in the early days of RStudio, the company,
there was a lot of interest and activity around R. But it was not like Python is today. I mean,
Python, just, you can't think of any niche and not find 15 packages that do that thing.
And there are two more venture-backed ones coming out next week. I mean, it's just,
the level of activity is on such a different level. And it's quite, it was quite a wake-up
call to come into that. You know, going to conferences and things like that and realizing,
like, okay, not only are we not a well-known entity in the Python world, especially after we
rebranded the company, but, like, the amount that you would have to scream to get over this noise
is just incredible. So, that was one big takeaway, is that we really don't have the luxury
of being heard or taking for granted that we're going to be heard with any particular message
that we have. And that makes it so much more important that when we tell our story,
that we know exactly who we're telling it to and that we know exactly what's going to
resonate with them. Because I think in the R community, when Shiny came out, people were
willing to spend the time to find out, like, does this really make sense for me? And they were
willing to do some work. And for Python, it's like, there's, like, 15 other options. So,
like, why would you? And there are so many very, I think, because it's such a big community
and there's so much, at least it's perceived that there's so much money to be made being
content creators for this community or whatever other reasons people have for doing content
creation. I've heard that there is sort of like a content treadmill that people get on
that adds to the noise where it's like, you know, in order for the algorithm to take me seriously,
I have to create a new, you know, Python package shootout every, you know, twice a week. And you
can only do so much research, you know, in three days. So, you end up with just this incredible
volume of, like, very shallow noise. And that's just not something I ever remember
being a big part of the R community. And I know it's, for Python users, it's both a blessing
and a curse, right? Like, it's awesome to know that whatever it is that you want to solve,
somebody is out there with either a free or paid solution for you. But now the work is figuring out
which makes sense. And a lot of the analysis out there is not going to be too helpful.
I will say, though, that in terms of the people that I've met in the community, there are, like,
two really big takeaways that I have. Number one, that almost everybody that I've met has been
very kind and generous to talk with us and, you know, pretty nice. And I don't know, like,
I had heard people in the R community say, like, you know, I have been in the Python community,
and boy, it's so refreshing to be here and whatever. And at least the particular conferences
that I've been to, and, you know, being 2022, 2023, I don't know how it was, you know, 10 years ago.
But, yeah, I really saw a lot of the same things that I like in the R community happening in the
Python community, maybe without the sort of slightly more tightly knit feeling that comes from,
you know, being a smaller community for so many years. But the other thing is that it's such a
big community that I feel like it is very, very hard to generalize what people, like, what a
Python data scientist even is. It is hard to even divide it into four or five groups. There are just,
there's so much diversity. There are people who are, like, so much more commercial than the average
R user is, who are so much more focused on, like, you know, this is a purely commercial sort of
interest for them, to people who are so much more extreme free software zealots than I have ever met.
And that's coming from someone who obviously, like, really, really believes in open source software.
I had, like, a couple people ask us at PyData Seattle, okay, so, like, you have all this open
source stuff, but you also have, like, these complimentary, you know, commercial offerings.
Like, to me, you don't count as open source. It's like, what? Or people who say, like,
because your governance model is not open and you don't have, like, a democratically elected board,
you're not open source. I'm like, like, cool that you have that position. Totally respect that. But
to say that open source is the word that means the thing that I like, I'm like, wow, this is not
something that I have ever encountered in the R world. So, again, the whole spectrum has been
represented at each of the conferences I've been to. And I was, I guess I was a little bit surprised
that it's not just, like, such a big community, but so incredibly, incredibly, incredibly diverse.
Awesome. Thank you. I appreciate hearing all of that so much. Really, really grateful for your
thoughts on that. Thanks, Joe. Thanks, Joe. I see there was an anonymous question from
actually towards the beginning, I want to make sure I get to as well. And it was,
I get questions from IT and leadership about data security with Shiny apps. What training or tools
do you recommend for testing our Shiny apps? For example, like pen test? Yeah, that is a really
good question. I used to have good answers for this because we would receive the pen test reports
from people. And I will say two things about those pen tests, I think. One, I was surprised
how well those pen test tools worked against Shiny in the sense that, like, the tools didn't break,
like they did actually run their tests and treat Shiny as no different than any other web app that
they would test. So that was cool to see. And there were, you know, results that, like,
once in a blue moon would actually be relevant. But on the other hand, I think, like, in my
experience, the false positive ratio to, you know, true security issue, that ratio is, like,
it's really surprisingly noisy. And, like, noisy in a scary way, because,
like, they sound very, very plausible. Like, these reports come back and they sound very,
very plausible. But, like, nine times out of 10, they're just using heuristics and don't
really understand, like, what the parameters they are looking at and what value they have.
So I would say if your organization says to use them, I would expect whatever pen test,
whatever web-based pen test tool that you're using to work. But if you have red flags come up,
expect to have to go through our support and talk it through with them. In terms of actually
improving your security, I think a higher value thing is to read the, there's a very standard,
I think OWASP is the acronym, O-W-A-S-P, the Open Web Application Security Project or something
like that. And they have an ever-evolving list of, like, the top ten vulnerabilities,
classes of vulnerabilities you need to worry about when you're building your web applications.
And I found those to be consistently excellent advice. Like, every one of those vulnerabilities
is one you should at least be aware of. And if you're a more experienced Shiny developer,
hopefully you should be able to at least be able to connect the dots between how they're
expressing the problem and how that might affect your Shiny app. Like, you know, code injection
is one example where you take a parameter from a user, and the classic one is you just take
whatever name they typed in and you just, like, glom that onto the end of a SQL query string that
you have, right, and put, like, quotes around it. But that's, that user, that input is coming from
the user. They could put, you know, a single quote in their input, and that would finish your
string, and now their input is being interpreted as SQL code. There's a famous XKCD about this. If
you Google for Bobby Tables, you'll find it. So that's an example of, like, a SQL injection.
That's totally something that if you weren't paying attention, you could introduce into a
Shiny app, right? You could form a SQL query that you're about to send to, you know, Oracle or
Postgres and add user input to the end. So there are things that you need to do to not do that.
So for sure, run the pen test if your organization does that. But I think more important, read
through the OWASP list of vulnerabilities.
Thank you, Joe. I see that we have gotten to the top of the hour very quickly. This might be a
record for how fast this time is going by. But I see a lot of people saying thank you so much, Joe,
and Javier just said, Shiny single-handedly changed the trajectory of my career. So thank you so much.
That's so nice. Something I wanted to ask you before we go is, what's something that you're
most excited about as you think about the year ahead?
I think there's a lot of things to be excited about for Posit, the company.
Oh, actually, okay. I'm going to start with my team, but it applies to the company as well.
I'm really excited about some of the people that we have added to the team over the last few months.
And I know, like, anytime you hire someone, it's, at least for me, I really feel like that's a,
you never know how it's going to go, and it can really improve or hurt the team. And I'm
really excited about the people that we've added lately and really excited to see where
they help the entire team move over the next year. And I think actually thinking about it,
that's true for Posit as well. I think some of the people we've added over the last year have
the potential to be really the right people to help us get to the next level as a company.
So yeah, the people, wow, that's very original, but I'm excited about the people.
Was there anything that you actually wanted to ask us all here?
I put you on the spot for that. I didn't ask you that.
I'm in question answering mode. I think if we had more time, yeah, I would love, and I'll say I have
really enjoyed, you know, the times when I get to lurk in these data science hangouts. I certainly
learn a lot from you all. You know, the discipline of building, you know, the software that we build
is so, so different from the using of it that you all do. And we always want to be guided
by the actual stuff that everybody's out there doing. So yeah, I'm always happy to just lurk
and hear what you all are up to. Well, we love that you join us here
on the hangouts too. And just want to say thank you again, Joe, for sharing your experience and
guidance with us all here. And thank you all for joining today and all the great questions.
I didn't want to forget to say again that we will be on a bit of a break for July,
but we'll be back on Thursday, August 3rd. We were just chatting a little bit in the Zoom chat
about maybe having a little summer book club and Subtract is a book that just keeps coming up. I
know Livvy is really excited about that book. So I can post more about that in our data science
hangout LinkedIn group too. But if anybody is interested in joining that. But thank you all
so much for making the hangout what it is and being here with us today. Have a great few weeks
and I'll see you in August.